she wrote when I become famous I will
tell everyone that I know a hero named
Marlon Peterson heroes rarely look like
me
in fact I'm what garbage looks like no
not the most appealing way to open a
talk or start a conversation and perhaps
we have some questions going through
your head about that while this man say
such a thing about himself what does he
mean how can someone view him as a as a
hero when he sees himself as garbage
I believe we learn more from questions
than we do from answers because we're
when we're questioning something we're
invested and taking us some sort of new
information or grappling with some sort
of ignorance that makes us feel
uncomfortable and that's why I'm here to
push us to question even when it makes
us uncomfortable so my parents are from
Trinidad and Tobago the southernmost
island in the Caribbean Iran is also
home to the only acoustic instrument
invented in the 20th century steel pan
deriving from the African drums and
evolved from the genius of one of the
ghettos intranet a city called Lavin
team and the disregard of the American
military so I should tell you America
during world war ii had military bases
set up in trinidad and when the war
ended they left the island littered with
empty oil drums the trash so people from
latin t read repurposed the all jumps
left behind into the full chromatic
scale steel pan playing music now from
from Beethoven er Bob Marley the city
sent those people literally made music
out of garbage twelve days before my
20th birthday I was arrested for my role
in a violent robbery attempt in lower
Manhattan while people were sitting in a
coffee shop four people were shot two
were killed five of us were arrested we
were all the products in Trinidad and
Tobago we were the bad immigrants or the
anchor babies that Trump and millions of
American
easily Milan I was discarded by waste
material and justifiably so domain I
eventually started 10 years two months
in seven days of a prison sentence I was
sentenced to a decade of punishment in a
Correctional Institution I was sentenced
to irrelevance the opposite of humanity
interestingly it was during those years
in prison that a series of letters
redeemed me
Jania help me move beyond the the
Daltons and the guilt associated with
the worst moment of my young life gave
me a sense that I was useful she she was
13 years old she had wrote that she saw
me as a hero I remember reading that and
another crime with his words when I read
those words she was one of over fifty
students in a 150 letters that I wrote
during a mentoring correspondence
program that I co designed with a friend
who was a teacher at a middle school in
Brooklyn my hometown we called it the
young scholars program every time those
young people share their share their
stories with me their struggles every
time they did your pitch of their
favorite cartoon character and sent it
to me every time they said it depended
on my letters or my words of advice it
boosts my sense of worthiness it gave me
a sense of what I could contribute to
this planet it transformed my life
because of those letters and what they
share with me their stories of teen life
they gave me the permission they gave me
the courage to admit to myself that
there were reasons not excuses but that
there were reasons for that fateful day
in October of 1999 that the trauma
associated with living in a community
with guns that easy to get in centers
that the trauma associated was being
raped at gunpoint at the age of 14 that
those reason those are reasons for me by
making that decision that fatal decision
was not an unlikely proposition because
those letters mattered so much to me
because writing received and that had
that communication with those folks so
he
impact in my life I decided to share the
opportunity with some friends of mine
who were also inside with me my friends
bill and Corrigan a rock so principled
violent crimes also shared their words
of wisdom with the young people as well
and received a sense of relevancy in
return we are now published writers and
youth program innovators and trauma
experts and gun violence prevention
advocates and Ted talkers and and and
and good daddies that's what I call a
positive return of investment above all
else with that what building that
program taught me was that when we when
we so when we invest in your humanity of
people no matter where they're at we can
reap amazing rewards in this latest era
of criminal justice reform I often
question and wonder why why is it that
so many believed that only those who
have been convicted of nonviolent drug
offenses merit empathy and recognize
humanity criminal justice reform is
human justice am I not human when we
invest in resources that amplified the
relevancy of people and communities like
laven teo parts of Brooklyn or ghetto
near you we can literally create the
communities that we want we can do
better we can do better than investing
solely and law enforcement is a resource
because they don't give us a sense of
relevancy that is at the core why so
many of us do so many harmful things in
the pursuit of mattering the gun
violence is just a visible display of a
lot of underlying traumas when we invest
in the redemptive value of relevancy we
can render returnable personal
responsibility and healing that's the
people work I care about because people
work family I'm asking you to do the
hard work the difficult work the
churning work of the store and
undeserved cons upon those whom we can
relegate as garbage who we can disregard
and discard easily I'm asking myself
over the past two months I've lost two
friends to gun violence both innocent
bystanders one
was caught in a drive-by while walking
home the other was sitting in a cafe
while you're in breakfast while on
vacation in Miami I'm asking myself to
see the redemptive value of relevancy
and the people that murdered them
because the hard work is seeing the
value in me I'm pushing us to challenge
our own capacity to fully experience our
humanity by seeing by understanding the
full biography of people who we can
easily choose not to see because heroes
are waiting to be recognized and music
is waiting to be made thank you
[Applause]
[Music]